Manual dexterity is a key skill in motor development. There are conflicting studies on the influence of sports practice on this skill and on which type of sport trains this ability the most in youth. Manual dexterity is usually assessed with expensive and time-consuming tools not easily available to facilities such as schools or sports clubs. The aim of this study was to assess differences in manual dexterity performance between young basketball players, sportsmen, and non-sportsmen. A further aim was to analyze whether the coin rotation task was a reliable tool for assessing manual dexterity. Based on the characteristics of the sport, we hypothesized that basketball players had better manual dexterity performances. Seventy-eight participants were included in the study and categorized into “basketball”, “sports”, and “non-sports” groups. Manual dexterity was assessed with the grooved pegboard, the coin rotation task, and the handgrip tests. The basketball group showed better performance in all tests. Significant differences were found between the basketball group and sports group and between the basketball group and non-sport group in the grooved pegboard (p < 0.05) and in the handgrip (p < 0.05) tests. Test–retest reliability of the coin rotation task scores was moderate in the basketball group (ICC2,1 0.63–0.6). Basketball practice could positively influence manual dexterity. The coin rotation task showed an acceptable construct of validity.

Introduction
Manual dexterity is the ability to manipulate objects through hand and finger coordination and is indicative of well-developed neuromotor function. It is the result of the functioning of different capacities such as cognitive function, muscle strength, and force control1,2. Fine hand skills are related to the different activities that people perform throughout their lives and they are fundamental for the development of self-efficacy and autonomy in the activities of daily living in young people. For example, the quality of children’s handwriting is highly dependent on manual dexterity and this can influence children’s participation in academic activities3,4.

There is now ample evidence of the beneficial effects of sports practice, especially in the early stages of life, on motor development and the maintenance of an adequate state of health5,6,7. However, the studies that associate physical activity or sports practice with the development of manual dexterity are conflicting in terms of results and, furthermore, it is not clear whether one sport can be more efficient than another. For example, Ziviani et al. investigated the association between daily physical activity and movement skills in children aged between 6 and 12 years, finding no significant correlation between manual dexterity tasks and daily physical activity8. George et al. investigated the effect of 6 weeks of physical activity, practiced with multimedia supports, in children aged between 6 and 12 years, finding an improvement in manual dexterity performance in males only but not in the entire sample which included males and females9. Kuloor showed no difference in eye and hand coordination (i.e., dexterity) between sportsperson and non-sportsperson10. Although these studies analyzed the influence of physical activity or sport on manual dexterity, practicing a specific sport may stimulate manual dexterity differently. The protocols of some study have demonstrated a significant effect on the development of manual dexterity using exercises with similar characteristics to a specific basketball training session of11,12. Basketball is a sport that requires eye-hand coordination, bimanual and visuomotor coordination, and manual dexterity to perform dribbling, passing, catching, throwing, shooting, and movements in dynamic and changing environments13,14,15. Basketball training involves manual dexterity and hand–eye coordination skills and determines a physiological adaptation of the brain nuclei involved in learning these skills. In fact, it has been demonstrated that the constant practice of basketball causes an increase in striatum and cerebellar volume in players which does not occur in inactive people13,16. Indeed, the cerebellum is involved in motor learning16 and the striatum plays a key role in motor learning, in the long-term memorization of well-learned movements, in the acquisition of manual and visuomotor skills, and in the bimanual coordination skill17,18,19,20,21.

Based on these physiological adaptations, it would be reasonable to hypothesize better manual dexterity in basketball players compared to inactive peers. Moreover, manual dexterity performance in young basketball players has not been studied and compared to that of those participating in other sports.

Hence, the first aim of this study was to investigate manual dexterity in young basketball players and to compare the performances to sportsmen and non-sportsmen of the same age. This could be useful for monitoring performances and manual dexterity development and possibly guiding parents in choosing the most appropriate sport for their children.

Furthermore, there are several neuromotor tests to measure manual dexterity with different efficacy according to age. Among them is the time it takes to complete the grooved pegboard test (GPT)22 or the most recent and simplest is the coin rotation task (CRT)23. The validity of this task has been studied in subjects with stroke, multiple sclerosis (MS), unilateral cerebral lesions24, and in children with specific learning disorders23. However, no studies have used this test to measure manual dexterity in young basketball players. Furthermore, the handgrip test (HGT) is considered an important indicator of upper extremity function25 and is often used as a diagnostic criterion for neurodegenerative diseases26,27.

For this reason, based on the training characteristics of basketball and through the use of these three tests (i.e., GPT, CRT, and HGT), the second aim of this study was to investigate the reliability of the CRT to establish a starting point for considering this test a cheaper and easier tool to measure manual dexterity performance in young active population of all contexts, even in schools or sports clubs.

Methods
Study design
For this cross-sectional study, we collected data from the recruited sample at one time point.

Recruitment process
150 participants were assessed for eligibility between November 2022 and February 2023 in Sicily (Italy). In detail, we contacted by telephone the parents or guardians of: (a) 50 participants from the lists of 8–15 year category provided by the coaches of a basketball club in Palermo (Sicily, Italy); (b) 100 participants from the lists of 5 classes provided by the school principals of two Sicilian schools randomly chosen. Then, written information was sent.

Before starting the manual dexterity assessment, all participants filled out a questionnaire. The questionnaire was administered online via a link, and it was asked to indicate age, sport practiced, years of sporting activity (continuous), with which hand they write, and lateralization. From the responses, we categorized participants into the basketball group (BG), sports group (SG), and non-sports group (nSG). Specifically, participants included in the SG practiced soccer, volleyball, dance, gymnastics, karate, and kickboxing, but not basketball. This choice was made to include in the SG eye-hand and eye-foot coordination sports and sports with free-body exercises without tools. The inclusion and exclusion criteria for each group are reported in Table